rm: linux: add deeper information about lmp updates (#629)
foundriesio/docs: source/reference-manual/linux/linux-update.rst

    If issues are found when reproducing these steps, do not hesitate to contact `Foundries.io support <https://support.foundries.io/>`_.

Updating Your Factory
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tip::
    We suggest that the release migration is performed on a new branch forked off your stable development so it does not impact your current devices.
    After tested, the changes be merged back to development.

    See :ref:`ref-new-branch`.

``lmp-manifest``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We provide a helper script ``update-factory-manifest`` to update your FoundriesFactory to a new LmP release.
This script tries to automatically update your manifest to the latest LmP version available:

.. code-block::

    $ git clone https://source.foundries.io/factories/<myfactory>/lmp-manifest.git
    $ git clone https://github.com/foundriesio/lmp-tools
    $ cd lmp-manifest/
    $ git checkout <branch to update>
    $ ../lmp-tools/scripts/update-factory-manifest
    New upstream release(s) have been found.
    Merging local code with upstream release: 91
    Proceed ? (y/n): y

If no merge conflicts are found, it merges your changes and pushes the updated manifest to your Factory, triggering a new platform build.

> Once published, the update is deployed to your devices following this tag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once published, the update is deployed to devices following this tag.
```

> Common Problems

Reviewer 2: I would say "Common Pitfalls" instead.

"""""""""""""""

> The most common problems found at this stage are related to manual changes to ``lmp-manifest``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Usually at this stage, the problems are related to manual changes to ``lmp-manifest``.
```

However, I would drop "manual" and say only "changes". As we cannot control how the changes are made

> For example, if you have manually bumped ``meta-lmp`` in order to bring in new changes, it causes a merge conflict:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, if you have bumped only ``meta-lmp`` to bring in new changes, it causes a merge conflict:
```

.. code-block::

    $ ../lmp-tools/scripts/update-factory-manifest
    Auto-merging lmp-base.xml
    CONFLICT (content): Merge conflict in lmp-base.xml
    Automatic merge failed; fix conflicts and then commit the result.

    Unable to perform automatic update.  Restoring previous state.

    One of these last few commits is probably causing a conflict:
    f54f9f9939b6c1548f838e9bd85b98bb01a6a42f (HEAD -> next) lmp-base: bump meta-lmp

In this case, you need to identify the conflicting commit and revert this change before proceeding:

.. code-block::

    $ git revert f54f9f9939b6c1548f838e9bd85b98bb01a6a42f
    $ ../lmp-tools/scripts/update-factory-manifest
    Automatic update successful!

.. tip::

>     If something goes wrong, don’t fret! This is why we use version control!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If something goes wrong, do not fret! This is why we use version control!
```

    .. code-block::

        $ git revert HEAD

``meta-subscriber-overrides``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The previous step triggers a new platform build for the latest LmP release in your FoundriesFactory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The previous step triggers a new platform build for the latest LmP release in your Factory.
```

> The previous step triggers a new platform build for the latest LmP release in your FoundriesFactory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The previous step pushes the update to the FoundriesFactory, which triggers a new platform build for the latest LmP release.
```

> During the migration, this initial build often fails as ``meta-subcriber-overrides`` may have changes that need to be adjusted to the new release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is expected that, during the migration, this initial build fails as ``meta-subcriber-overrides`` may have changes that require adjustments to the new release.
```

.. tip::
    It is helpful to :ref:`sync the Factory sources locally <ref-linux-building-ref>` so you can easily navigate through the Factory code.
    Some of the suggestions here are based on this.
    Remember: ``bitbake -e`` is a powerful tool.

* **Layer compatibility**

Make sure ``meta-subscriber-overrides`` is compatible with the current OE release.

.. code-block::

    $ cat meta-lmp/meta-lmp-bsp/conf/layer.conf | grep COMPAT
    LAYERSERIES_COMPAT_meta-lmp-bsp = "kirkstone"
    $ cat meta-subscriber-overrides/conf/layer.conf | grep COMPAT
    LAYERSERIES_COMPAT_meta-subscriber-overrides = "kirkstone"

* **Revert changes**

In some cases, we need to bring LmP post-release changes into the Factory to fix critical bugs or to bring in a new feature.

> An example is to bump projects.

Reviewer 2: to bump projects or to bump packages?

Author: @angolini I'm not sure what's the correct wording here. We usually do aktualizr bumps for example.

.. code-block::

    [REVERTME-v90] sota: device register: bump lmp-device-register

    Bump lmp-device-register to bring patch that makes writing of
    config files safer.

    diff --git a/recipes-sota/lmp-device-register/lmp-device-register_git.bbappend b/recipes-sota/lmp-device-register/lmp-device-register_git.bbappend
    new file mode 100644
    index 0000000..0bdbd23
    --- /dev/null
    +++ b/recipes-sota/lmp-device-register/lmp-device-register_git.bbappend
    @@ -0,0 +1 @@
    +SRCREV = "848bcbbba886320b13b11ac04826be0361288619"

> The recommendation is to tag commits like this with a ``[REVERTME-vXX]`` tag that indicates which LmP version they should be reverted.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this sentence.
Why am I reverting a bump? I don't get why a bump is problematic? (I think I missed something in this explanation)

Author: @angolini If we do a bump with a new SRCREV in meta-subscriber-overrides, then what's set in meta-lmp will be overwritten, that's what I meant
Any suggestions to make this clearer? This is something normal most customers do and we revert once changes are applied to their current lmp versions
Just a note: we will probably have another doc about applying patches/bumping recipes from lmp due to the new source code policies, after that we can link a page here

.. code-block::

    $ git log --oneline | grep REVERT
    aaaaaaa [REVERTME-v90] sota: device register: bump lmp-device-register
    bbbbbbb [REVERTME-v90] sota: aktualizr: bump aktualizr
    $ git revert aaaaaaa
    $ git revert bbbbbbb

* **U-Boot**

To debug U-Boot issues, it is important to understand the U-Boot sources.
You can get the necessary information from the local build:

.. code-block::

    # Getting the U-Boot recipe name
    $ bitbake -e lmp-factory-image | grep PREFERRED_PROVIDER_virtual/bootloader
    PREFERRED_PROVIDER_virtual/bootloader="u-boot-fio"

    # Getting the U-Boot tree url based on previous output
    $ bitbake -e u-boot-fio | grep SRC_URI
    SRC_URI="git://github.com/foundriesio/u-boot.git;protocol=https;branch=2021.04+imx_5.10.35-2.0.0-fio file://fw_env.config file://lmp.cfg "

    # Getting U-Boot revision to sync sources
    $ bitbake -e u-boot-fio | grep SRCREV
    SRCREV="d5976b6253dcae875fb42fbef68e1d05e7de5141"

Now syncing U-Boot to the proper revision:

.. code-block::

    $ git clone git://github.com/foundriesio/u-boot.git # SRC_URI
    $ cd u-boot
    $ git checkout d5976b6253dcae875fb42fbef68e1d05e7de5141 # SRCREV

a. Patches

> In some cases, customer Factories carry U-Boot code that has been applied in LmP sources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some cases, Factories carry U-Boot code that has been applied in LmP sources.
```

> In some cases, customer Factories carry U-Boot code that has been applied in LmP sources.
> These patches do not apply cleanly to the sources and cause build errors (`do_patch` fails).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Customer Factories sometimes carry U-Boot code that has been applied in LmP sources.
These patches do not apply cleanly to the sources and cause build errors (`do_patch` fails).
```

    .. code-block::

        MACHINE=<machine> DISTRO=lmp-mfgtool source setup-environment

Verifying Your Work
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After you get a successful build, it is time to test the new artifacts.

If the LmP update brings a new U-Boot or Linux kernel version, the recommendation is to reflash a device from scratch and verify it is able to boot the new image.
Debug and fix eventual issues as you go.

After the device is able to boot to user space, validate other aspects that changed in this release, like out of tree kernel drivers and other customizations.
Basic LmP features, like OTA capabilites, are tested at every release for the reference hardwares.

Once you are happy with the software, you can then try an OTA from your latest release to this new Target.

.. important::
    Remember to trigger :ref:`ref-boot-software-updates` when necessary.

1. Take a bench device and flash it with the latest stable image of the **old** LmP version (e.g. v88).

2. Register it to the Factory to the tag which brings the new LmP version, for example ``next`` (e.g. v91):

> .. code-block::
> 
>     $ lmp-device-register -n test-lmp-update -t next

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    .. code-block::

        $ lmp-device-register -n test-lmp-update -t next
```

3. After the registration, the board updates from the **old** LmP version (v88) to the latest one available for the ``next`` tag (v91).

4. Fix eventual update issues until you get a successful iteration.

Merging Back to Development
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once your ``next`` branch is in a good state, you may wish to migrate your development branches to this new release.
Here, the development branch is called ``devel``.

1. Clone all 3 required repos:

> .. code-block::
> 
>     $ git clone https://github.com/foundriesio/lmp-tools
>     $ git clone https://source.foundries.io/factories/<YOUR FACTORY>/lmp-manifest
>     $ git clone https://source.foundries.io/factories/<YOUR FACTORY>/meta-subscriber-overrides

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    .. code-block::

        $ git clone https://github.com/foundriesio/lmp-tools
        $ git clone https://source.foundries.io/factories/<YOUR FACTORY>/lmp-manifest
        $ git clone https://source.foundries.io/factories/<YOUR FACTORY>/meta-subscriber-overrides
```

2. Update ``meta-subscriber-overrides``:

> .. code-block::
> 
>     $ cd meta-subscriber-overrides
>     $ git checkout next
>     $ git pull --rebase
>     $ git checkout devel
>     $ git pull --rebase
>     $ git merge --ff-only next
>     $ git commit --allow-empty -m "[skip ci] Update to LmP v91"
>     $ git push

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    .. code-block::

        $ cd meta-subscriber-overrides
        $ git checkout next
        $ git pull --rebase
        $ git checkout devel
        $ git pull --rebase
        $ git merge --ff-only next
        $ git commit --allow-empty -m "[skip ci] Update to LmP v91"
        $ git push
```

3. Update ``lmp-manifest``:

> .. code-block::
> 
>     $ cd lmp-manifest
>     $ git checkout devel
>     $ git pull --rebase
>     $ ../lmp-tools/scripts/update-factory-manifest
>     New upstream release(s) have been found.
>     Merging local code with upstream release: 91
>     Proceed ? (y/n):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    .. code-block::

        $ cd lmp-manifest
        $ git checkout devel
        $ git pull --rebase
        $ ../lmp-tools/scripts/update-factory-manifest
        New upstream release(s) have been found.
        Merging local code with upstream release: 91
        Proceed ? (y/n):
```

4. Proceed by typing ``y``. This updates the ``lmp-manifest/devel`` branch and trigger a build for the new release.

5. Once it is built, a new Target for the latest LmP release becomes available for your development devices following ``devel``.

Common Errors and Tips
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> * A good practice when debugging migration issues is to compare the reference machine changes from one LmP version to the other. Likely, the changes from the reference machine should be mirrored to your custom machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A good practice when debugging migration issues is to compare the reference machine changes from one LmP version to the other.
  Likely, the changes from the reference machine should be mirrored to your custom machine.
```

Reviewer: Apologies, GitHub formatting is a pain, I'll make any format changes locally later on, as a follow up after this is merged.

* Working on the LmP update in a separate branch is highly recommended so it does not block your development branches.

* For machines that support :ref:`lmp-mfgtool distro <ref-lmp-mfgtool>`, use that for a quick debug iteration: there is no need to flash the whole image to verify U-Boot, for example.

> * Also for machines that support :ref:`lmp-mfgtool distro <ref-lmp-mfgtool>`, the suggestion is to keep a single source of patches for hardware support (for ``u-boot-fio``/``u-boot-fio-mfgtool`` and ``linux-lmp-fslc-imx``/``linux-lmp-dev-mfgtool``). This avoids duplicated code in the Factory. Example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Also for machines that support :ref:`lmp-mfgtool distro <ref-lmp-mfgtool>`, the suggestion is to keep a single source of patches for hardware support (for ``u-boot-fio``/``u-boot-fio-mfgtool`` and ``linux-lmp-fslc-imx``/``linux-lmp-dev-mfgtool``). This avoids duplicated code in the Factory.
For example:
```

    "

    $ cat recipes-bsp/u-boot/u-boot-fio_%.bbappend
    FILESEXTRAPATHS:prepend := "${THISDIR}/${PN}:"

    require u-boot-fio-<vendor>.inc

    $ cat recipes-bsp/u-boot/u-boot-fio-mfgtool_%.bbappend
    FILESEXTRAPATHS:prepend := "${THISDIR}/${PN}:${THISDIR}/u-boot-fio:"

    require u-boot-fio-<vendor>.inc

* You can find the list of patches appended to the sources by grepping ``SRC_URI``, for example Linux kernel:

.. code-block::

    $ bitbake -e linux-lmp-fslc-imx | grep SRC_URI
    SRC_URI="git://github.com/Freescale/linux-fslc.git;protocol=https;branch=5.10-2.1.x-imx;name=machine; \
    git://github.com/foundriesio/lmp-kernel-cache.git;protocol=https;type=kmeta;name=meta;branch=linux-v5.10.y;destsuffix=kernel-meta \
    file://0004-FIO-toup-hwrng-optee-support-generic-crypto.patch \
    file://0001-FIO-extras-arm64-dts-imx8mm-evk-use-imx8mm-evkb-for-.patch \
    file://0001-FIO-tonxp-drm-bridge-it6161-add-missing-gpio-consume.patch \
    file://0001-arm64-dts-imx8mq-drop-cpu-idle-states.patch \
    file://0001-FIO-temphack-ARM-mach-imx-conditionally-disable-some.patch \
    file://0001-FIO-internal-arm64-dts-imx8mn-evk.dtsi-re-add-blueto.patch "

> * Sometimes, a core recipe can change names or become versioned. In this case, old `.bbappends` may fail to override the recipe, for example:

Author: maybe I can say a recipe was renamed?

> * Sometimes, a core recipe can change names or become versioned. In this case, old `.bbappends` may fail to override the recipe, for example:

Reviewer 2: I prefer to way only "recipe was renamed"

.. code-block::

    ERROR: No recipes in default available for:
      /build-lmp/conf/../../layers/meta-subscriber-overrides/recipes-kernel/linux/linux-lmp-dev-mfgtool.bbappend

To fix this, go through the ``layers`` folder to understand the change to the core recipe, for example:

.. code-block::

    # v88
    $ find ../layers/ -iname linux-lmp-dev-mfgtool*
    ../layers/meta-lmp/meta-lmp-base/recipes-kernel/linux/linux-lmp-dev-mfgtool.bb
    ../layers/meta-lmp/meta-lmp-bsp/recipes-kernel/linux/linux-lmp-dev-mfgtool.bbappend
    ../layers/meta-lmp/meta-lmp-bsp/recipes-kernel/linux/linux-lmp-dev-mfgtool

    # v91
    $ find ../layers/ -iname linux-lmp-dev-mfgtool*

>     ../layers/meta-lmp/meta-lmp-base/recipes-kernel/linux/linux-lmp-dev-mfgtool_git.bb

Reviewer 2: Now I get what you mean. All recipes are versioned! The difference is that now the version is explicitly set on file name.

.. note::
   You can subscribe to `Factory Notifications <https://app.foundries.io/settings/notifications>`_ to be informed of new LmP releases.

This page covers the steps for updating LmP to the latest release version.
It also shows common update problems and how to solve them.

.. note::
    The examples show a LmP update from v88 to v91 for an i.MX 8MMini based machine using the ``imx8mm-lpddr4-evk`` reference machine.
    Similar steps are taken for different reference hardware and LmP versions.

.. tip::
    When facing issues to reproduce these steps, do not hesitate to contact `Foundries.io support <https://support.foundries.io/>`_.

Updating Your Factory
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tip::
    We suggest that you perform the release migration on a new branch, forked off your stable development, so as to avoid impacting your current devices.
    After testing, the changes can be merged back to development.

    See :ref:`ref-new-branch`.

> 

Author: I thought this was already covered (both linux building as well as finding u-boot and kernel sources)

``lmp-manifest``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We provide the helper script, ``update-factory-manifest``, to update your ,Factory to a new LmP release.
This script tries to update your manifest to the latest LmP version available:

.. code-block::

    $ git clone https://source.foundries.io/factories/<myfactory>/lmp-manifest.git
    $ git clone https://github.com/foundriesio/lmp-tools
    $ cd lmp-manifest/
    $ git checkout <branch to update>
    $ ../lmp-tools/scripts/update-factory-manifest
    New upstream release(s) have been found.
    Merging local code with upstream release: 91
    Proceed ? (y/n): y

If no merge conflicts are found, it merges your changes and pushes the updated manifest to your Factory, triggering a new platform build.

> .. warning::

Reviewer 3: Good Remark!

    Unable to perform automatic update.  Restoring previous state.

    One of these last few commits is probably causing a conflict:
    f54f9f9939b6c1548f838e9bd85b98bb01a6a42f (HEAD -> next) lmp-base: bump meta-lmp

In this case, you need to identify the conflicting commit and revert this change before proceeding:

.. code-block::

    $ git revert f54f9f9939b6c1548f838e9bd85b98bb01a6a42f
    $ ../lmp-tools/scripts/update-factory-manifest
    Automatic update successful!

.. tip::
    If something goes wrong, do not fret! This is why we use version control!

    .. code-block::

        $ git revert HEAD

``meta-subscriber-overrides``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The previous step pushes the update to the FoundriesFactory, which triggers a new platform build for the latest LmP release.
It is expected that, during the migration, this initial build often fails as ``meta-subcriber-overrides`` may have changes that require adjustments to the new release.

.. tip::
    It is helpful to :ref:`sync the Factory sources locally <ref-linux-building-ref>` so you can easily navigate through the Factory code.
    Some of the suggestions here are based on this.

>     Remember: ``bitbake -e`` is a powerful tool.

Author: @caiotpereira please check this note

.. code-block::

    KERNEL_DEVICETREE=" freescale/imx8mm-evk.dtb ...
    $ cd linux
    $ find -iname imx8mm-evk.dts
    ./arch/arm64/boot/dts/freescale/imx8mm-evk.dts

Compare the changes from this file between the two versions and apply them to your machine device tree.

.. tip::
    In some cases, changes in included ``.dtsi`` files cause build errors due to nodes that were moved or dropped, specially from the ``<soc>.dtsi`` file. Usually, the reference hardware device tree brings an updated fix for these issues. Please review these changes as needed.

* **OP-TEE**

OP-TEE config differences can be spotted by diffing the two releases:

    * OP-TEE configs in v88: https://github.com/foundriesio/meta-lmp/blob/mp-88/meta-lmp-bsp/recipes-security/optee/optee-os-fio-bsp.inc

    * OP-TEE configs in v91: https://github.com/foundriesio/meta-lmp/blob/mp-91/meta-lmp-bsp/recipes-security/optee/optee-os-fio-bsp.inc

.. code-block::

    $ cd meta-lmp
    $ git diff mp-88 mp-91 meta-lmp-bsp/recipes-security/optee/optee-os-fio-bsp.inc

Bring relevant changes from the reference machine to your machine code.

* **Mfgtool** (if applicable)

.. note::

>     Not all machines require/support ``mfgtool`` build. Currently, i.MX and STM32MP are supported.

Reviewer 3: I wonder if the TI mfg tool was officially released.

Author: yes, it is part of lmp
